>>Huston Smith is a holder
of 11 honorary degrees.
He's an internationally
recognized philosopher
and scholar of religion.
His book, "The
World's Religions,"
has been the most widely
used textbook on the subject
for a third of a century.
Dr. Smith taught at Washington
University, MIT, Syracuse
University, and the University
of California, Berkeley.
In 1996, Bill Moyers
devoted a five-part special
to Dr. Smith's life and his
work called "The Wisdom of Faith
with Huston Smith."
Huston Smith himself has
produced three series
for public television.
And his films on Hinduism,
Tibetan Buddhism, and Sufism
have all won awards at
international film festivals.
We appreciated the clarity and
insight in his recent book,
"Cleansing of the
Doors of Perception,"
and especially gained
much and enjoyed
much with his latest
work, his latest book,
"Why Religion Matters."
Let us welcome Huston Smith.
[APPLAUSE]
>>It's not usual for me
to lecture sitting down.
The doctor's still
can't quite figure
what's happened
to my lower back,
but I happen to know the
deep subliminal reason.
Which I haven't told them.
For a number of years now, Ram
Dass has been one of my gurus,
and when, a couple of months
ago, we shared the platform
for a benefit for the
Zen Hospice project
in San Francisco, his
last words were suffering,
my suffering has brought
me closer to God.
And I thought, well, if
that's what it takes,
I'll just follow
along in his trail.
I wish that his yoga were
not quite as demanding,
but nevertheless, there it is.
Now my topic is the third eye.
As an organ of wisdom, we come
across this cross culturally
in many, many of the
leading spiritual traditions
of the world.
The term itself comes
from the Tibetans,
but it has its con
counterpart, Plato
called it the eye of the soul.
Sufis call it the
eye of the heart.
But, never mind the terminology.
All of them target an organ of
perception capable of seeing
things which are ocular
eyes cannot take in.
And I'm not going to tell
you the story about how
that organ works.
It beats me.
It's far too mysterious
for me to give
a linear rational account.
So I'm going to be circling this
topic rather than giving you
a straight forward instruction
on exactly what it is
and how it works.
My remarks will be
divided into three parts.
I want to begin by
telling you a story.
It is, of course,
a teaching story,
but that's what I'm-- and that's
what I'm going to begin with.
And the second part,
I will move from there
into the phenomenon of savants.
We used to call
them idiot savants,
but of course, we have learned
that that's totally a misnomer.
They do not, they're
in no ways idiots,
but they're savants--
a word means
knowing-- because they are
gifted with a special channel
of knowing.
And then finally, I want to
go to the cognitive sciences
and see what they might
make of this phenomenon.
And then, as something
of a coda or a wrap-up,
I will turn to the
entheogens, which
are the direct
trigger of everything
that I will be saying
this afternoon.
All right, to begin
with the story.
I just learned
this morning what I
would have suspected
that there is,
living in Oakland, a woman
whom some of you know.
Her name is Elizabeth
Mayer, known as Lisby.
And she has only entered our
company within the last year.
She's a new friend and
a very valuable one,
because she's on very
exceptional woman.
The credentials, well, she
mounted the Christmas Revels,
which has become an
institution in Oakland
in the Christmas season.
But never mind the details.
This story comes from her.
And it is one the most
remarkable stories
that we have ever encountered.
We, my wife and
I, though Berkeley
has taught me never
to say my wife.
Say she whose husband I am.
So but-- Lisby is one of our
most valuable, valued friends.
And this story comes from her.
I will strip it down,
not to make it too long.
A daughter of theirs, very
early around the age of eight,
expressed an interest
in having a harp.
Well, harps are not inexpensive,
and at the age of eight,
why your interests come and
go, so her parents said, well,
we will rent a harp for you
and start you on harp lessons,
and we'll just see where
things stand in two years.
Well, she evidenced an
extraordinary faithfulness
to this passion for the harp.
Practiced regularly with great
joy, and around the age of 14,
I think-- well,
in the meanwhile,
the parents had
bought her a harp,
and a very good one to
reward her for her fidelity.
And at the age of
14, she was actually
a member of the Oakland Symphony
Orchestra, one of the harpists.
And then after one
concert, when they
were unpacking
things, loading things
from dressing costume
room for operas and so on,
the harp didn't turn up.
They searched for
two weeks, assuming
it was lost in the pile
of costumes somewhere.
But finally they gave up.
Nowhere to be found, the
harp was clearly stolen.
They were crestfallen,
but Lisby's mother
had a peculiar
interest in dowsing.
Now dowsing isn't exactly
finding lost objects,
but Lisby was desperate
and knew where to turn,
so she told her mother
about it, and says,
can dowsers find
objects that are lost?
Well, no, we work on water, but
she said we've got a network.
And there is some people in
that who find lost objects.
I'll get on the phone
and see what I can do.
A couple of days pass,
and then her mother
called back and
said, well, I think
I've come upon
somebody who would
be worth your looking into.
His name is Harold McCoy.
By the way, I may
have a few details.
It may be Harvey McCoy,
but I know it's McCoy.
And he lives in Fayetteville,
Arkansas, in a trailer.
And here is his phone number.
So Lisby called him, and I
wish I were good at dialect,
I'm not.
But Lisby is, and
you could almost
see the straw coming
out of the guys teeth
in the accent, Ozark
accent that Lisby gave him.
And she said, I hear
that you find things.
We've lost a harp.
A harp's been stolen.
Do you think you
can help us find it?
And without any
hesitation, he said, yes, I
can find that harp for you.
And then he said,
where do you live?
And she said Oakland.
And he paused for
a moment, he said,
is there a 580
highway in that area?
And she said yes.
Those of you who
know the Bay Area
know that it goes
right through Oakland.
And so Harold said, well,
that's all I'm getting now.
I've never been to Oakland.
I've never been any
further west than Kansas,
so I don't know Oakland.
Could you send me a
street map of Oakland?
Yes.
So that was sent.
A few days later, he
called back and he said,
I've found your harp.
You take this 580
highway going west,
and then when it-- and I
checked it on the map--
when it closes,
crosses Broadway,
you make a left turn on
Broadway and you go two blocks.
And then you make a right
turn, and after that right
turn, in the block, next
block, in the second house
on the right, that's
where your harp is.
Well, what was Lisby to do?
Her first thought was
she went to the police
and asked if they
could conduct a search.
They laughed at her.
We have to have a warrant
to search a house.
And what's the warrant for?
Some hypothesis of some
cook, the psychic who
says something's in that house.
They just laughed at her.
So Lisby and her friends
put their heads together
and finally decided
on this strategy.
They printed up a
flyer, saying lost harp.
Reward.
No questions asked, and
then her telephone number.
And they plastered a four-block
area around that house,
nowhere else.
Nothing happened
for about a week.
And then a phone call came,
is this the harp woman?
Yes.
And the voice said, I
know where that harp is.
It's in the house
next door to mine.
I'll just throw in, you
know, the probability
is that he was the thief
and it was in his house
and he was getting
nervous about the way
in which these flyers were
zeroing in on that area
and wanted to unload it.
And so there were
calls back and forth,
but I don't want to string
this out any longer.
And finally, the man said,
you know, the Safeway
a few blocks from here?
Yes, she knew it.
There's a small wood
area behind that.
Lisby knew it.
He said, I will bring
that harp there,
have that harp there at
9 o'clock tomorrow night.
And Lisby said, I'm sorry,
it's very dark back there.
There are no lights.
And I don't want to go into
that area alone by myself.
But they worked it out.
There was a fire escape
iron, an iron fire escape,
and the agreement was
that at 9 o'clock,
why Lisby would be half way up
that stairs, and sure enough,
he came rushing and thrust
this object up at her,
and then turned to run.
And Lisby called
wait, your reward.
And he turned around and
she threw him an envelope
and there it was.
OK, that's my story.
If you don't believe
it, ask Lisby.
And there are people
here who know her.
Now I want to go
to move from that.
Obviously, this man had a
talent that is totally lost
on the rest of us.
We don't have
anything like that.
By the way, I did omit
the fact, oh, I just
have two more minutes,
because, of course Lisby,
filled with gratitude, said
what can we do for you?
This was a handmade harp.
The harpists would
stop over in Oakland
to have the chance to play.
Oh no, he said, if
I took any money,
I couldn't do this
sort of thing.
And she persisted.
And finally, he said,
well there is something.
Do you know any educated folk?
That's in the hillbilly twang.
Well, Lisby allowed, she
has her undergraduate
from Harvard under
John Kenneth Galbraith.
And a PhD in psychology.
Yes, I know a few
educated folks.
And he said, Harold said, I've
never met any educated folks.
But it might be interesting
if I, I've always thought,
if I could get
together with them,
why we could each learn a
little something from the other.
And so it was arranged,
he was flown out.
And actually, he thought he
could teach other people.
And there were a few workshops.
But turned out that it
wasn't transmittable.
What I forgot to say is this
talent, he wasn't born with it.
It came with him when he
took a very serious fall
and went into a concussion.
And the clairvoyance and
so on came after that.
And when, it turned out
that his workshops weren't
very successful in
conveying the art.
Why, I thought to myself,
what he overlooked
was to have somebody behind
the door with a baseball bat,
and when they came in,
why give them that.
OK, now let's go from this.
Let's go from this to the
phenomenon of savants that have
been very carefully studied.
And some of the best studies
come from Oliver Sacks,
the neuropsychiatrist.
And you may have read
his story about-- I
forget the name-- it's
something like the Tourette's
syndrome, where, just
unpredictably, people just
go into spasm.
Normally, before that, and
then sort of roll on the floor
and so on.
And Oliver Sacks
did a careful study
of a physician up
in the Northwest.
And working in a
rather small town, just
revered by the people as
the best physician ever.
But they would entrust
themselves to him
because he never had
a spasm convulsion
while he was operating.
He happened also to
be an amateur pilot.
And having become friends
with Oliver Sacks,
said it's a pleasant afternoon,
let me take you up for a ride.
And Oliver confesses
to be very nervous.
What if we went into that
syndrome up in the sky?
And what would happen then?
But it never happened then.
And I'll throw in
this little tidbit.
In the entire
history of theater,
there has never been one case
when an actor sneezed on stage.
Now you know, who's
in charge here,
when these kinds of
covering mechanisms
rule out what otherwise
would gum up the work?
Just two more examples,
one quite recent.
Leslie Lemke, the musician,
he was on television a decade
or so ago, and he
was a piano player.
Not very good, not very good.
But, he would invite
anybody from the audience
to come up and play any piece
from classical to something
they had made up.
And after they finished it,
he would go to the platform,
to the piano, awkwardly--
his body coordination wasn't
very good-- and
repeat the number that
had been played, right
down to the mistakes
that the player had made
in playing a number.
But I think my favorite example
is of a slave, Thomas Fuller.
This man has been
studied very carefully
by a professor of psychology
at Clark University, who
found him
extraordinary and would
go down and conduct experiments,
and write down careful notes.
And the one that I took enough
interest in to note is--
Now Thomas Fuller, a
slave, could barely count.
And once a professor
said to him,
and I don't carry these
figures around in my head,
so I'll just give them to you.
He said Tom, how many seconds
are there in 70 years, 17 days,
12 hours?
Well, it took Tom about two
minutes to work that through.
And then he said 2,210,500,800.
Well, the professor went
back to his rooming house
that evening, got
out his calculus
or whatever they had in those
days, maybe in his head,
and worked out the figures.
And triumphantly, he
went back the next day,
and told Tom that
he had over counted.
That it was considerably
short of that.
Whereupon, Tom, cap in
hand, replied, Mr., Mr.,
you forget the leap years.
Now what's going on?
What's going on?
And what does this tell
us about the human mind?
Well, I told you I'm
not going to give you
any detailed answer,
because I don't know.
But, to me, it is proof positive
that somewhere in our makeup,
are veil by veils
of oblivion, there
are talents that we do not
normally have access to.
William James said that in so
many words, and [INAUDIBLE]
and Aldous Huxley,
and William James
are only two of the
eminent thinkers-- three--
that I know who said it would
be more accurate to think
of the human mind
as a reducing valve
rather than as a
generator of information.
You catch the point
that in principle, it
may be unlimited,
conceivably unto omniscience.
But if we tried to walk down
these streets of New York City,
with all the information
flooding in on us, obviously,
our attention would
not be focused
on the cars that were
bearing down on us,
and we obviously
could not survive.
So, now I'm through
with my second part,
and the moral of that is that
we, at least in entertain
this possibility of the
mind as a reducing valve
rather than as a
generator of information
based on prior experience that
we've acquired in this life.
Now with that in place I want
to turn to my third part, which
is the cognitive sciences.
I'm going to report
a theory that
is being put forth by
people at the very cutting
edge of cognitive science.
It's not by any means agreed
upon by the profession,
but I'm talking about people
like Steve Pinker, who
heads a cognitive
science program at MIT.
I think we can assume
he's no slouch.
And then Bernard McGinn at
Rutgers University, Tom Nagel
at New York University.
The best account
of their position
is in a book by
Bernard McGinn-- Colin,
I'm sorry-- Colin McGinn,
titled "The Mysterious Flame."
It's good because
it is absolutely
state of the art in
terms of knowledge.
But as Steve Pinker said,
again, thinks like a razor
and writes like a dream.
And it's a combination.
He knows what he's
talking about,
but he has a wonderful way of
making complex ideas simple.
So I'm going to be summarizing
the thesis of this frontier
school, knowing that in
a knowledgeable audience
like this, a number of you are
already acquainted with it.
So bear with me as I
tell it to the others.
Now McGinn begins by saying
it's common knowledge
that Descartes in
the 17th century
split the world in two,
into mind and matter.
For 300 years,
McGinn continues, we
have known two
things indubitably
about this categorical division.
First, there are
two things involved.
Meaning it is impossible to
reduce either to the other.
Of course, the behaviorists try.
They try to reduce
mind to matter,
but despite BF Skinner's noble
attempt, or ignoble, at least
very valiant attempt,
why it doesn't work.
There are two things here.
The second thing we know, beyond
any peradventure of a doubt,
is that there is mutual
causation between the two.
If I tell my body to raise
my right hand, it obeys.
That intention, that
desire, that thought somehow
signals the neurons
firing in the brain, which
activate nerves, which activate
muscles, and my hand goes up.
On the other hand,
we know very well
that if I were to fall
off those platform
and suffer a severe concussion
that would scramble whatever
there is in this brain, why
I could lose consciousness,
the pictures would stop
and everything could go,
would go black.
So we know those two things.
We have two things that can't
be reduced one to the other,
and there's two-way causation.
However, now the story
begins to pick up.
In 300 years, we
have not discovered
one iota as to how each of
these can influence the other.
If you hold the human
brain in your hand,
you've got a handful
of gray matter, which
in appearance doesn't look too
different from, say, the liver.
And how is it that this
gray matter in our crania
can elicit thoughts
and feelings,
and the liver can't come
any closer to doing that,
anywhere close to doing that.
Now it begins to get
really interesting,
because with those
points, in fact,
they move on to this
surprising statement.
And this, they say,
may be exactly where
it is going to remain.
Now that's a different note to
hear from science, you know.
Usually what we hear is give
us a problem, give us the time,
and give us the money, and we
will come up with the answer.
But for scientists
themselves to say,
in this, we may have just
bumped into something that
is too big for the human mind.
For what do we think
we are-- I'm still
paraphrasing-- omniscient?
And in this, as I
say, issue, they're
saying we may have encountered
a problem that's too big for us.
Then they go on to
say every species has
things that it's good
at doing and things
it's not good at doing.
Birds have a mastery, a
genius for building nests out
of little scraps of this,
that, and the other flotsam,
and a little saliva
mixed in, that
would just make any construction
crew green with envy.
And ants have a talent
for building nests.
This is really
amazing, as you know.
Every ant seems to
be intuitively aware
of what every other
ant in the colony
is doing in building
this, and where
the spaces are that need to it
to enter to fill that space.
Human beings building
bridges, whatever,
can't get into that
ballpark of this kind
of intuitive psychic connection
between the other ant.
What about us?
Language, obviously.
We are geniuses compared with
other species in language,
the complexity and alike.
And we're good at science.
No other species can
come close to us,
not even really engage
in it in any direct way.
But, this mind
brain connection may
be just one of those mysteries
that we are not good at solving
and to repeat their
own conclusion,
this may be where it
will always remain.
Now I've completed
my three parts
and have laid out the
trajectory, but really
how I got into all of this is
the bafflement that I continue
to have as to how certain
molds of chemistry
can open the doors of
perception to ultimate reality.
Because, for my part, they do.
It's an unshakable premise
to me that, again, we always
have to factor in
set and setting,
but when we do that, for some
people, in some circumstances,
changes in brain chemistry can,
the best metaphor we have is
open the doors of perception
or the windows or perception
on to a radically
different view which comes
to us with the ring of truth.
Now each of you has your right,
of course, to raise questions
about that, but I'm
just telling you,
and this is the
best we can do when
we're in an area as
mysterious as this,
is to call it as we see it.
So nonnegotiable to me is that
it does veridically open us
to a deeper and more
profound seeing of the nature
of ultimate reality.
Of course, there's other cases
where the set and setting isn't
right, where it just comes
out as gibberish and nonsense,
but I'm talking about
the authentic experience.
All right, if I begin with
that as my nonnegotiable,
then how am I going to explain
why, as far as we now know,
a very limited number,
a handful, maybe six,
maybe eight-- if you get into
anthropology and small tribes,
maybe more than that--
a very restricted number
of plants or chemicals
have the power to do that.
I not just think, I
worry about that a lot.
But having come upon,
within the last year,
this frontier school of
cognitive psychologists,
I would still like to know
the answer to my question.
How is it that certain
substances, limited number,
can do this and others cannot?
And I don't know,
but I take comfort--
not quite the right word,
but I won't fish around--
assurance that if the
professional in cognitive
science cannot explain even
the first step, namely,
how can these two related
parts of ourselves interact,
even if we're doing nothing
more than looking at a glass
of water?
And they cannot explain how
your own firing will produce
a subjective experience of
light gleaming on the surface
of the water, why should I
feel humiliated, or badly,
or defeated if I cannot explain
something which seems to me
to be far more momentously
mysterious than simple a color
coming through the brain
functioning into my experience.
And that's where I
am at this point.
And I think it's
customary to allow
for questions or comments.
And I don't know who's
in charge around here,
but if that is so, why this is
now your time to talk to me.
>>Yes, would you please comment
on neurotheology, please?
>>Well, I mean, let
me tell you something
that really how that happened
in an audience I was addressing,
and somebody was pressing
neurotheology quite hard,
and was going on and on,
to me, rather tiresomely
about how brain research, we're
getting more and more precise
as to what areas control
what cognitive activities.
And finally, I was getting a
little annoyed with his detail
and his grandiose
pride and how we're
getting it down more
and more precise,
and I finally said--
when he gave me
a chance-- I said, well,
while you have been talking,
your speech has eventuated
from brain chemistry and neuron
firing in your
left brain, right?
Let's just leave it to that.
The left brain
monitors language.
And probably, I
said, you can get it
to certain parts of
the brain, but is
that neural
underpinning, does it
give us any clue as to whether
what you are saying is true?
In other words, do
you think you're
going to get it down so
precise that if you activate
this neuron, it will
give you true statement,
and if you activate this one, it
will give you false statement?
Well, he admitted he had
never thought of that.
But certainly, in some ways,
the correlation and mapping
can be made more precise, but
I don't foresee that anything
in that direction which
is going to give us
the faintest clue as to
whether our thoughts are true.
And therefore, I think there
is a cutoff point beyond which
that whole activity is not
going to generate what we really
want to know.
>>What you're
saying is that we've
reached the limit of
a certain trajectory,
and that limit that what we're
trying to really understand,
what we're really
trying to understand,
perhaps we don't really know
the question that we're asking,
but that we're approaching
the question in a way that
is based on a fundamental
misunderstanding of reality.
And I know that a lot of
the traditions in the world,
in the ancient teachings
that are still alive today,
speak about this, as
far as I understand,
as fundamental
misunderstanding, at least they
have their ideas about
the way that science
has been approaching things.
I'm curious, as the
expert, or as one
of the great minds
on these traditions,
can you please
clarify what you feel
the mystical traditions
have been saying
is this misunderstanding,
what the traditions have been
saying, and then what your
understanding is from studying
all of these together?
What do you find is
the common ground?
>>There is one.
I'm not sure that it's the
most relevant one to what you
may be thinking about.
But I think the great choice
between the scientific
worldview and the traditional
religious worldview,
one of the key
differences is that
in the scientific worldview,
matter is the fundamental,
is the foundation of reality.
And everything else comes from
a refinement and rearrangement
and so on of matter.
In the traditional view,
spirit is the most,
is the fundamental
reality, and matter is,
it's like icebergs,
appearing here and there
in the infinite ocean
of consciousness.
So you see we have a fundamental
difference of approach
that I think you were
trying to tease out.
In the scientific
worldview, consciousness
is an epiphenomenon.
It is sort of like the steam
that is give off in the brain
when the brain gets to
working in certain ways
and certain activities,
but the steam
depends on the-- I've
mixed my metaphors, never
mind-- on matter.
So you're trying to get from
matter to consciousness.
I personally think
that's impossible.
Epiphenomenal, mind as
epiphenomenal and matter.
The scientists try to explain
it by the word "emergence."
Consciousness emerges
out of matter,
but they totally
missed the point
that emergence is a
descriptive term rather than
an explanatory term.
It tells us what happened,
but now not how it happened.
Now, in the traditional view,
consciousness and spirit
are fundamental, and it's
like the great chain of being.
Infinite awareness,
the Hindus would say,
saccidananda, infinite
being, infinite awareness,
infinite bliss.
And then it's a graded ladder,
the great chain of being,
and the further removed,
what we're talking about
is from that infinite
sea of awareness,
being in bliss,
more shadow, or more
the light dims in proportion to
our distance from the source.
So you're quite
right in targeting
two different approaches.
Both of them are
very mysterious.
I happen to think
that of the two,
if we were not conditioned
to the contrary,
we would find the traditional
religious view more plausible,
more understandable.
But we've been heavily
conditioned to the opposite.
>>Mr. Huston, could you
comment on the phenomenon
that we see where
other tissues seem
to take on functions that we
normally reserve for the brain?
Specifically,
transplant patients
who have received the heart
of a donor, these patients
then take on memories of
both vocabulary, events,
specific memories of events
that come from the donor?
>>I'm glad you raised that.
I have read those
reports, and assuming
that they are veridical,
and some of them have,
that I have read, are written
by reporters who are just
trying to get at
the facts and not
arguing any particular
case, so yes, I
would be open to
that possibility.
>>Hello, my question has to do
with neurological disorders.
And I'm wondering
about schizophrenia,
people that have bipolar,
bipolar depression,
different kind of
neurological problems
and what is has to do with.
Is it a short
circuit in the brain?
And what kinds of treatments
are there out there right now?
>>This is out of my depth.
I mean, this is for the
specialists who work in that.
I will mention one thing
that it brings to my mind.
One of my students
at Cal, he was
my student as an
undergraduate premed student.
In a seminar on mysticism,
where we used my book
"Forgotten Truth," he-- by the
way, what I'm going to say next
is very self-serving, but I'm
too old to worry about it--
he said, it changed his life
more than any other book
he had ever read, and
though he continued and has
is MD, why it was that
book that made him sure
he wanted to go into
psychiatry as a special,
his special field,
working with the mind.
And his last letter to
me was saying how sure,
how happy he is to find what
he has chosen to work with.
He's totally engrossed
with it, but the reason
he wrote his letter was
after reading my last book,
"Why Religion Matters."
He said, though
"spirit" is still
kind of a suspect
word in psychiatry,
he is finding among his
mentors and his colleagues,
as he's doing his
residence in psychiatry,
that there is a growing
recognition among psychiatrists
of the extent to
which psychiatric
and, for that matter,
medical disorders
are occasioned by a yearning
in the patient's life, which
this world, with its
standard outlook,
is incapable of fulfilling.
And I found his testimony
as an apprentice journeyman
up the ladder, that he was
speaking for his profession.
And even to recognize
that, I think,
is a very real step forward,
and he saw it as being,
this is a change
that is occurring
within the field of psychiatry.
>>In my explorings
with entheogens,
these states of
consciousness, I've
been struck with how different
each plant, or entheogen, how
different each one sort of
reacts with my consciousness,
and with all the discussion
this last weekend about there
seeming to be some web, quantum
web of consciousness that
sort of unites us
all, have you thought
about why it is that, depending
on which entheogen you ingest,
you seem to go to a
different part of that web.
And it seems like I go
to different places,
depending on which
entheogen I take.
And I'm sort of wondering, why
isn't it always the same place?
Because there's a remarkable
difference in the places
it seems you are taken to.
>>You know, my involvement
was very important,
I might say decisive for me, but
nevertheless, quantitatively,
there are many in
this audience who
have had a wider experience.
The three, actually, added by
peyote, when in the last decade
I got involved with the Native
American Church winning back
their religious rights.
But before that, there was
only the standard three
LSD, mescaline, and psilocybin.
And I couldn't
even-- of course, I
didn't have very many, only
two or three with each,
but I could not see
that they were taking me
into different
places, or if they
were, the commonality of that
other world just overshadowed
the differences.
But in saying that, I'm
just simply registering
the limitations of my
experience on this question.
>>Hi Dr. Smith.
I'd like, in your expertise,
to give me an idea
how to introduce to top
leaders, in management,
people in the high levels of
decision making, what third eye
or intuition management
and responsibility
within among your
book, your work,
within the cognitive sciences.
What would you recommend that
I can use in this scenario?
>>That is a strait of
society that I do not
mingle with very much.
But, there is back of your
question a more general one,
and that is whatever you're
in, management, government,
whatsoever, are there
certain fields of endeavor
where this will help
more than others?
Not to my knowledge.
I just deal with the
generic human situation.
Is the target audience
important here?
Managers--
>>Yes, it is, because
you're talking about leaders
and people in power
that makes decision
how to do management, take
on the responsibility using
the third eye, or the intuition.
There are people.
They have that.
We all do.
So why not train
them on that area?
>>OK, now we're
talking specifically
about managers and leaders.
And the question is,
what would I say to them?
Well, actually,
there are people who
are working on this
who are we ahead of me,
and they don't
need my theorizing.
I'm talking about Willis
Harman and the Institute
of Noetic Sciences.
And the last time we were
going to a conference
together in Bombay, and we got
together as far as New York,
and then there was a
bomb scare in New York,
so they did not-- Air
India did not continue on,
but they put us up for the
night and brought to our rooms
a nice Indian dinner.
So with Willis Harman,
he was telling me
about how he was
working with managers
on just this area, because
there seems to be a growing
feeling, he was telling me,
that the really top managers,
they got to where they
were because they homed
their intuition,
not their logic,
numbers crunching, and
extrapolations of what to do,
but their inner feeling,
and sense, and intuition.
And he and others
were working, holding
workshops for top managers to
develop exactly that thing.
So I think it's already
happening without my needing
to give it any support.
By the way, there is a
generalization on this.
We-- and this is
important-- we always
know more than we
know how we know it.
And that is the final reputation
of idolatrizing a methodology
for producing right answers.
>>I'm a bit confused by
some of your remarks,
and certainly more of some
of the other presenters
about the role and
limitations of drugs,
particularly psychedelics, which
is seemed to be focused on.
On the one hand,
it seems that we're
told, not just at this
conference, but over and over,
to quiet the mind.
Purify the body.
And yet, at least in my very
limited psychedelic experience,
stretching back 25 years
ago, LSD did not do that.
It was quite the opposite.
It was very stimulating in terms
of sensory perception, which
seems contrary to
what we're being told.
Now, in addition to
that, as a psychologist,
I follow the line
of reasoning that we
want to make the unconscious
conscious, which I think also
has some spiritual
implications as well.
Drugs seem to diminish
consciousness and stimulate
the perceptions that our
body particularly has.
So some clarifying
comments would
help me understand the
role and limitations, uses
and disuses of drugs,
particularly, psychedelics.
>>First of all, on the
specific quieting the mind.
We heard a lot of that
from Russell this morning.
And, again, she whose husband
I am, is an avid meditator.
She teaches vipassana.
So I get a good bit of that
for supper every evening.
And I believe it.
But, it's not the whole story.
Nothing finite ever
is, because we've all
had the experience of hitting
on a new idea that was exciting.
And it's like fireworks
going on in the mind.
And that pays off, too,
that kind of thing.
So it's a very meandering line.
All I find, at the moment
at least, I can say,
is we can't absolutize
any one picture of this.
It's more like a feel theory
of everything going on
and how does it
creatively orchestrate?
Now that's a specific about
the quieting of the mind
that I heard.
And then the general rule
about the positive effects
and the negative, we know very
clearly that there are both.
Aldous Huxley's second
collection on this subject
was titled, "The
Heaven and Hell Drug,"
and it is the very mischief
to try to lay down guidelines.
Ram Dass said be sure you
have a firm base camp.
I think that's an absolute.
Translates in my mind is,
if your ego boundaries are
pretty fluent and porous,
don't touch these things.
That's my judgment.
Or at least, not unless
you're under psychiatric care
or something like that.
But blanket assertions,
it's too mysterious for me
to do much in the way of any
but the most obvious rules.
[APPLAUSE]